[Music]
When a practitioner faces an
unwholesome act by another person,
they don't develop an unwholesome mind. That's the
goal they're aiming for.
What is the goal of cultivating the mind? When they see an
unwholesome act by another person, they think
of ways to learn from that experience.
Teacher, do you understand this point? For example,
I've had this habit since I was little.
When I see someone being unwholesome
towards me, I immediately think, '
Next time, if I encounter a situation like this,
I won't handle it that way.' Is that
clear? So, when I'm faced with
an unwholesome act by another person,
if I let that thought
succeed in doing something unwholesome, it won't
happen. For example, when I was little, when
I saw something, I would quickly
laugh and think, 'Oh no, that's going to die!'
But then it would immediately turn around, understand?
It would immediately turn around and give rise to a feeling of
regret inside.
And that rarely happens, you know?
Because I have a chain of thoughts
in my mind: when I see something...  When
someone does something bad to her, she
immediately thinks of a way to avoid doing it herself,
understand? That's why, even
now, she teaches Dharma so skillfully to everyone. It's
because it's something inherent to her. She
speaks her mind exactly as she is.
She doesn't rely much on the words
of scriptures; she mostly
draws from her own experiences.
For example, if someone insults her,
she'll think, "If it were me, I
wouldn't do that." She tells a
story she often tells about her father taking some
food and asking if she wanted more rice. She says, "No, no." That means she doesn't want to eat. She was
n't even four years old then.
She doesn't want to eat anything else on the table,
not the bowl of rice
itself. "I'm eating more, do you understand?" Then she
goes with her father to a conference. Her father
drives a car, and because she was a child, her
father always carried her wherever he went, so she
ate.  At the conference, there was
so much rice on the table that everyone was
lifting her up and sitting her on this towering chair,
scooping rice and other things into her
bowl to eat. Everyone had almost
finished eating when her father turned to ask if she wanted to
eat more. She said, "I do
n't want to eat anymore," meaning she did
n't want to eat any more,
just the extra food.
She thought
she had finished the bowl of rice she was eating. Her father then
took her bowl and
cleared everything away, and she didn't say anything more. Even though she was so
young, she didn't say anything
because she knew her father understood. So
she realized that next time
she would ask someone, she would ask, "Do you want to finish
the rest of the rice?" instead of asking, "Do you want to eat more rice?"
She had
developed a habit of learning from
experience.
Thinking about it, "Dad is like this, Dad is
like that," according to
other people's normal habits, do you understand? Other people
's normal habits
are that if someone takes something from them or
offends them, they immediately
react and think badly of that person,
understand? But from my own experience, I did
n't react that way. My reaction
was to learn from experience.
For example, my mother, for instance. I was upset about
not eating, so she got angry and asked, "Yen, are you
going to eat?"
When I was crying, feeling sad
inside, I felt hurt and
refused to eat. Then, when they forced me to
eat, I would cry like this and that,
and they would force me to swallow and
eat. I wasn't angry at
my mother at all. I just learned from experience that
next time someone cries, I'll let them
cry until they've finished.
That is, until their crying stops. Because I had that kind of
mindset, those
negative thoughts didn't
appear, understand? They didn't.  Whenever
an unwholesome thought arises, it's because of the
experience I've gained. So, she said
that when we encounter any problem, we should first
focus on the experience we've learned. At that very
moment, we won't have any
unwholesome thoughts towards those
around us, and we'll appreciate those
moments. Otherwise, what will we learn from? We
usually live without anger or hatred,
even if someone harms us. Only then will
we have a
lesson because we ourselves
don't harm anyone. Those who harm
others never learn
anything from their experiences. And if we do
n't harm others,
where will we get the lessons to learn from the
harm people inflict on each other in this world?
Do you understand? So now, when someone
harms us, we realize
we've been harmed, we're suffering, and
we won't do that again. She
also practices as a nun. Why did she establish
such a good monastic order and set such good rules? Because...  Back when
she was a nun in that monastery,
every time she was treated differently by those above,
she thought, "If I did
this, I would do this, and
everyone wouldn't be treated this way or
that way." She was in a position below. For example, back then,
she was just at the back of
the monastery, and she
saw those above imposing their will on those below,
saying things they wouldn't listen to. For instance,
she would ask, "How do I cook this?" Like, "How do I
cook rice?" They would say, "
Why do you have to ask this and that?"
She would then say, "Okay, then." She meant that if
it were her, she would tell everyone everything
so they knew how to cook and do it, so
they wouldn't make
mistakes in every single thing. If
people knew how to do things, they wouldn't make mistakes.
When she established the monastery,
she would cook rice and say, "Everyone, whatever you have, you can offer it to the
community to cook at home." She would do
all sorts of things.
Now, if she didn't have
those things...  If people who go ahead
stumble, and you follow behind, you'll
stumble too. This shows that without
those who go ahead, if they don't stumble, you
won't see them stumble, and
you'll never learn from their experience. Everything in this spiritual practice is either something you learn from, or something
you hear about
people's objections, their
discomfort, their opposition, and you learn from them
to do what you're doing. So,
how can you change when you repent? That's why I often
tell you, my children, that if your mind is unwholesome, I
don't force everyone to be like me.
Because it
reacts immediately, it's unpleasant, it's ego-driven, and
then you can't
do anything. So now, you have to gradually
cultivate it to be like my mind. After each
thing, you learn from your experience, okay?
Next time, I'll do this, this, or
that, and you'll progress very quickly.
For example, if someone curses me tomorrow, or
in some other situation, you
children...  So, I'm really angry, really angry. Yes,
I accept that I'm really angry and have negative thoughts.
But I also learn
from my actions.
Why did I let people get angry?
Next time, I'll learn from my mistakes, or
if I were in their situation,
I would handle it differently so that
I wouldn't make the same mistake again. Understand? So,
in that state of regret, it means
clearly seeing the old mistakes and abandoning them. It
means learning from
experience, abandoning the mistakes of the past, and regretting the
mistakes of the future. So,
learning from experience, for example, today I went
in at 6:00 and saw everyone upset.
Next week, I'll learn from my experience and go from
5:00 to 15:00. That means there has to be a lesson learned, and I'll do it
immediately. So,
when I repent, all
sins in this realm don't exist, the
word "but" doesn't exist
because if I were upset because of this realm,
then this realm wouldn't exist.
Somewhere in the Dharma realm, they learn from experience,
but I'm so angry because that
lightning strike... It struck down there.
So every living being outside is
thunder, lightning, storm, and tempest, understand?
So if I keep focusing on the outside world, when will my mind ever be
extinguished? Understand? The outside is outside, the inside
is inside.
How can I cultivate my mind so that it remains unmoved amidst
this ever-changing stream of life? What is this changing stream of life?
People are being kind to
me, then they turn against me—that's the
changing stream of life. How can I keep my mind from being
angry or resentful towards
that person? That's my responsibility. To reach my goal,
I must still love them. I must examine my
mind and not harbor any
anger, resentment, or blame towards them. My
loving mind remains the same. I have to compare the time
from when my mind is still close
to them until they oppose
me, until they kill me, until they falsely
accuse me. These two minds
remain on the surface—that's the goal that a
practitioner strives for.  It has to be like that, or
the person who helps me to the very end is better
than the person who harms me. My mind still
acts that way, but outwardly, it's not because of
external circumstances. I'm angry at you
because you're like this and like that, there's no "
but" or "because". Of course, in the
process of accumulating merit, it will take a
long time to progress to that level because
my mind is unwholesome.
Why is my mind unwholesome?
Seeing what is beautiful, what is ugly, what is
love, what is hate. So
it must gradually rise to being neither beautiful
nor ugly, understand? It will take a long time to reach that level. That's
why in
Buddhism, one doesn't adorn oneself with beauty
first, not loving oneself, not loving one's own beauty, then
not loving the beauty of others. Love
gives rise to countless sins, that's why
Buddhism must start from there: not
loving one's own body, not loving the beauty of others.
Then comes the ego, that is, everything
comes from the self. So, in
repentance, we must know how to repent, that's how things are.  I
will
learn from my mistakes, but the "learning from mistakes" part is like, "
I see
this person, I see that next time I won't do it that way, that
's the wrong way. Not doing it that way means not
doing it anymore." It doesn't mean I won't do it anymore,
okay? For example, if
I'm helping someone carry something and I see
they're annoyed, I'll learn from my mistakes and
not do it again next time. It's not that
I have to learn from my mistakes just because they're
annoyed.
If it's a close friend, and the fault is
theirs, I'll point out their mistake. What
if it's not me? What if it's
someone I don't know?
I don't always live with people I know. If it's someone I do
n't know, I have to
learn from my mistakes. One way is to be
patient and move forward so they can get
along with
me. Another way is to learn from
my actions so they don't get
annoyed. If it's someone who gets angry at everything they see,
then at
that point, being patient doesn't distinguish between
right and wrong anymore; it's no longer about good and evil.
Then evil will strike me down, and it will strike
me down too. At that moment, I will cultivate my
mind again.
[Music]
K